DOCSP-37518 - CSOT (#49)
mongodb/docs-pymongo: source/connect/csot.txt

.. _pymongo-csot:

Limit Server Execution Time
===========================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference
 
.. meta::
   :keywords: error, blocking, thread, task

Overview
--------

> With {+driver-short+}, you can specify a **client side operation timeout**, a time limit
> for server operations to run. The timeout applies all steps needed to complete the

Reviewer: The phrasing here initially made me think that it was saying that a time limit is something that a server can run (like an operation or something). Maybe something like this will be more clear:

```suggestion
With {+driver-short+}, you can specify a **client-side operation timeout**, which specifies a time limit
for how long a server can run operations. The timeout applies all steps needed to complete the
```

Author: good call

operation, including server selection, connection checkout, serialization, and server-side
execution. When the timeout expires, {+driver-short+} raises a timeout exception.

You can specify a timeout in two ways: by using the ``timeout()`` method or by using
the ``timeoutMS`` connection option.

timeout() Method
----------------

> To specify a timeout in your code, call the ``timeout()`` method and pass the timeout
> length, in seconds, as an argument. You must call the ``timeout()`` method

Reviewer: S:
```suggestion
To specify a timeout in your code, call the ``timeout()`` method and pass it the timeout
length, in seconds. You must call the ``timeout()`` method
```

in a ``with`` statement, as shown in the following example:

.. code-block:: python

   with pymongo.timeout(10):
       collection.insert_one({"name": "Yngwie"})

In the preceding example, if the insert operation doesn't finish within 10 seconds,

> {+driver-short+}, raises an error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{+driver-short+} raises an error.
```

The timeout you specify applies to all operations inside the ``with`` block. In the
following example, the insert and find operations must both finish within a total of
10 seconds:

.. code-block:: python

   with pymongo.timeout(10):
       coll.insert_one({"name": "Yngwie"})
       coll.find_one({"name": "Yngwie"})

Nested Timeout Blocks
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When execution enters a nested ``timeout()`` block, the outer ``timeout()`` deadline is
paused. When execution exits the nested ``timeout()`` block, the previous ``timeout()``
deadline resumes.

The following example shows how nested calls to the ``timeout()`` method interact:

.. code-block:: python

>    with pymongo.timeout(5):

Reviewer: It might be helpful to do a quick walkthrough of this after the code example. Especially to explain that 10 second timeout that's not being used. Thinking back to our code comment conversation the other day, if for some reason a user can't read/understand the comments in that code block then this would probably still be unclear

       collection.find_one()  # Uses the 5 second deadline
       with pymongo.timeout(3):
           collection.find_one() # Uses the 3 second deadline
       collection.find_one()  # Uses the original 5 second deadline
       with pymongo.timeout(10):
           collection.find_one()  # Still uses the original 5 second deadline
       collection.find_one()  # Uses the original 5 second deadline

Thread and Task Safety
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``timeout()`` method is thread-safe. The timeout applies only to the current
thread, and multiple threads can configure different timeouts in parallel.

The ``timeout()`` method is also ``asyncio``-safe. The timeout applies only to the
current Task, and multiple Tasks can configure different timeouts at the same time.

The following example shows how to use the ``timeout()`` method with

> `Motor <https://github.com/mongodb/motor>`__, the MongoDB

Reviewer: Just a note - I think motor is being phased out (though idk how long that process is). So we may want to consider another example here. Probably a ticket for later but just wanted to call it out

Author: Tech reviewer - are there plans for this?

Author: @ShaneHarvey Can you comment on this?

The following code examples use the ``timeoutMS`` option to specify a timeout of 10 seconds:

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: MongoClient
      :tabid: mongoclient

      .. code-block:: python
         :emphasize-lines: 2

         client = pymongo.MongoClient("mongodb://<username>:<password>@<hostname@:<port>",
                                      timeoutMS=10000)

   .. tab:: Connection String
      :tabid: connectionstring

      .. code-block:: python
         :emphasize-lines: 1

         uri = "mongodb://<username>:<password>@<hostname@:<port>/?timeoutMS=10000"
         client = pymongo.MongoClient(uri)

If you specify the ``timeoutMS`` option, {+driver-short+} automatically applies the
specified timeout to each server operation. The following code examples specify
a timeout of 10 seconds, then call the ``insert_one()`` and
``find_one()`` methods. To see how the ``timeoutMS`` option compares to using the
``timeout()`` method, select the corresponding tab.

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: timeoutMS Option
      :tabid: uri-option

      .. code-block:: python

         uri = "mongodb://<username>:<password>@<hostname@:<port>/?timeoutMS=10000"
         client = pymongo.MongoClient(uri)

>          coll = client.test.test

Reviewer: Accessing the collection like this didn't work for me when I tried it in another code example. I think this syntax is for shell. Should probably update it to be application code: i.e. `coll = test_database[test]` 

Applies to all code blocks

         coll.find_one({"name": "Yngwie"})  # Also uses a 10-second timeout.

   .. tab:: timeout Method
      :tabid: method

      .. code-block:: python

         client = MongoClient()
         coll = client.test.test
         with pymongo.timeout(10):
            coll.insert_one({"name": "Yngwie"})
         with pymongo.timeout(10):
            coll.find_one({"name": "Yngwie"})

.. important:: ``timeout()`` Overrides ``timeoutMS``

   If you specify the ``timeoutMS`` option, then call the ``timeout()`` method
   in your code, {+driver-short+} ignores the ``timeoutMS`` value inside the ``timeout``
   block:

   .. code-block:: python

      client = MongoClient("mongodb://localhost/?timeoutMS=10000")
      coll = client.test.test
      coll.insert_one({"name": "Yngwie"})  # Uses the client's 10-second timeout
      # pymongo.timeout overrides the client's timeoutMS.
      with pymongo.timeout(20):
         coll.insert_one({"name": "Yngwie"})  # Uses the 20-second timeout
      with pymongo.timeout(5):
         coll.find_one({"name": "Yngwie"})  # Uses the 5-second timeout

Handling Exceptions
-------------------

> When a server operation exceeds the specified timeout, {+driver-short+}
> raises a timeout exception. If the exception is the result of a timeout, the
> ``PyMongoError.timeout`` property is ``True``. Otherwise, it's ``False``.

Reviewer: This is a bit confusing. If the driver raises a timeout exception, won't the exception always be the result of a timeout, and therefore always have the property as `True`?

I think this could be more clear if we just focused on handling the timeout error specifically and don't talk in the narrative about when it's false (can keep that else block in the code example though, just maybe un-highlight it). 

Happy to discuss this more if I'm misunderstanding or anything.

```suggestion
When a server operation exceeds the specified timeout, {+driver-short+}
raises a timeout exception, and sets the
``PyMongoError.timeout`` exception property to ``True``. 
```

Author: yeah, i can see the confusion. reworded

.. _pymongo-csot:

Limit Server Execution Time
===========================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference
 
.. meta::
   :keywords: error, blocking, thread, task

Overview
--------

> When you use {+driver-short+} to perform a server operation, you can also limit the amount

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you use {+driver-short+} to perform a server operation, you can limit the amount
```

Author: shoot, good catch. probably shouldn't have been working on this while watching basketball... 🏀

of time the server has to finish this operation. To do so, specify a

> **client-side operation timeout**. The timeout applies all steps needed to complete the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**client-side operation timeout**. The timeout applies to all steps needed to complete the
```

{+driver-short+} raises an error.

The timeout you specify applies to all operations inside the ``with`` block. In the
following example, the insert and find operations must both finish within a total of
10 seconds:

.. code-block:: python

   with pymongo.timeout(10):
       coll.insert_one({"name": "Yngwie"})
       coll.find_one({"name": "Yngwie"})

Nested Timeout Blocks
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When execution enters a nested timeout block, the outer timeout is
paused. When execution exits the nested timeout block, the previous timeout
resumes.

.. important::

   A nested timeout block can shorten the deadline of an outer timeout block,
   but it can't extend it.

The following example shows how to use nested calls to the ``timeout()`` method:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   with pymongo.timeout(5):
       collection.find_one()
       with pymongo.timeout(3):
           collection.find_one()
       collection.find_one()
       with pymongo.timeout(10):
           collection.find_one()
       collection.find_one()

In the preceding example, the code performs the following steps:

- **Line 1**: Creates a five-second timeout block.

> - **Line 2**: Calls the ``find_one()`` method inside the five-second timeout block. The server must
>    complete this operation within the five-second timeout.

Reviewer: There's a rendering issue here causing the hole line to bold. I'm not sure if this will fix it, but maybe?

```suggestion
- **Line 2**: Calls the ``find_one()`` method inside the five-second timeout block. The server must
  complete this operation within the five-second timeout.
```

- **Line 3**: Creates a nested three-second timeout block.

> - **Line 4**: Calls the ``find_one()`` method inside the three-second timeout block. The server must
>    complete this operation within three seconds.

Reviewer: Same issue as line 2
```suggestion
- **Line 4**: Calls the ``find_one()`` method inside the three-second timeout block. The server must
  complete this operation within three seconds.
```

> - **Line 5**: Calls the ``find_one()`` method outside the three-second timeout block. The server must
>    complete this operation within the original five-second timeout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Line 5**: Calls the ``find_one()`` method outside the three-second timeout block. The server must
  complete this operation within the original five-second timeout.
```

- **Line 6**: Creates a nested ten-second timeout block.

> - **Line 7**: Calls the ``find_one()`` method inside the ten-second timeout block. A nested timeout
>    block can't extend an outer timeout block, so the server must complete this operation
>    within the original five-second timeout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Line 7**: Calls the ``find_one()`` method inside the ten-second timeout block. A nested timeout
  block can't extend an outer timeout block, so the server must complete this operation
  within the original five-second timeout.
```
